boom we're live james welcome to the
show
thanks for having me
absolutely so i'm looking forward to
talking to you
um i love your work i think your work is
pretty remarkable and a lot of people
don't talk about what you're doing which
is pretty cool because you've opened
this like ancient world that's always
been there but
it's like i've i could see but i wasn't
really seeing right you're looking but
not seeing and i and i feel with what
you're doing
and what in your book you kind of open
this whole world and open people's minds
of how important breathing is so for
people that don't know who you are uh
have never heard of you have never seen
you uh kind of just give them a quick
background of who you are and then we'll
go from there sure i'm a science
journalist and an author
and i spent the last several years
researching and writing a book about the
seemingly mundane and
somewhat the silly topic of breath or at
least i thought it was a silly topic
until you start digging a little deeper
into it and then it reveals a whole
different story as you just mentioned
yeah so let's just get right into it
what was the biggest discovery that you
found with breathing
the biggest discovery
that
i thought was the most interesting thing
was that most of us are breathing
incorrectly our respiration is
completely messed up from our inability
to breathe through our noses to the
chronic respiratory problems that
afflict the majority of people on this
planet
and so just to realize that um
sort of made me
think that there must be a larger story
here why why are we such poor breathers
and what can we do about it and that was
really the genesis of this book idea
yeah why are we
bad breathers why do we start breathing
through our nose you know as caveman and
cave woman and then as we've evolved
into modern day there's a drastic in
influx of mouth breathers why is that uh
specifically
there's a lot of reasons the short
version is that our faces and our mouths
and our noses have dramatically changed
in just the last few hundred years
so much so that our teeth growing
crooked we're the first
mammal to to have chronically crooked
teeth widespread crooked teeth how weird
is that none of our ancestors had
crooked teeth and now most of us have
crooked teeth it's because our mouths
are too small small mouth
more difficulties breathing and this
sounds crazy until all you have to do is
look at the skeletal record and the
proof's all over the place
why did we start breathing out of our
mouth from the be like what's the origin
of mouth breathers see you're a good
reporter here you have to keep asking
these questions because that's that's
what i did
and you keep digging and you end up
into some very weird places and uh you
end up uh rediscovering things and in
anthropology you thought you were
writing a book about breathing what the
hell are you doing like looking at
ancient skulls so the the reasons again
i wish that there was a simple bulleted
uh three bullets this is why it's many
things it mostly has to do with the food
supply but it also has to do with our
culture
how we're sitting our oral posture the
clothes that we're wearing pollution
basically industrialized society has
made us the worst breathers
of any animal
i understand okay
so we've established and identified that
mouth breathing is bad nasal breathing
is good what are some of the detrimental
health effects of just being a mouth
breather i know a lot of people say oh
he's a mouth breather don't talk to him
he's a loser but
what are the detrimental effects of
being a mouth breather and then what are
the benefits of only doing nasal
breathing
mouth breathing is bad for you for
numerous reasons it exposes your lungs
to pollution and mold and dust and
whatever is in the environment it makes
you much more apt to have periodontal
disease because it changes the ph in
your mouth makes it become a lot more
acidic which is a breeding breeding
ground for bacteria
it also tends to make you breathe too
much and too often which stimulates a
sympathetic response which is a fight or
flight response in your body it changes
the the way that your brain functions we
can see all this in studies that have
been done for for decades and decades
the benefits of nasal breathing is
you're slowing down your breathing
you're relaxing your body you're getting
less air and you're able to use more of
that air so you're breathing more
efficiently and breathing is something
we do twenty thousand twenty five
thousand times a day if you're doing it
inefficiently your body is eventually
gonna break down that's what we're
seeing throughout society right now
it's interesting you said that you get
more oxygen breathing through your nose
but you can but it feels like you're
getting more volume through your mouth
volume and efficiency um aren't the same
thing so you can eat a lot more food but
that doesn't necessarily mean you're
going to get a lot more energy from that
if you're eating 5 000 calories a day of
junk food i've seen a lot of very lazy
people eating that so it depends on how
you take in that breath it depends where
that breath comes from so uh it's
similar to nutrition you know uh
breathing through the nose is the
healthy way of of breathing
this is how we're designed if you were
to take an x-ray of a human skull it's
very ornate and complex here in the
sinus cavities for a reason nature
didn't do this by accident
so we release nitric oxide which is a
vasodilator increases circulation helps
with oxygenation also that pressure from
breathing through the nose allows us to
extract more oxygen with each breath we
get about 20 percent
more oxygen breathing through the nose
than we do equivalent breaths through
the mouth if you think that's not going
to make a difference throughout the day
during athletic performance during focus
you're crazy
so when i'm on the treadmill and i'm
doing like my tibetan sprints i'm doing
20 seconds on 10 seconds off and i'm
keep doing that after i do about eight
sets of anything i don't care if you're
doing cartwheels that's a lot
and immediately i want to breathe
through my mouth to get more volume why
is my brain telling me breathe breathe
through your mouth to get more volume
because i've tried just doing pure nasal
breathing from your work and other
people's work like wim hof and
everything and when i my heart is
pounding out of my chest i'm in an
extreme emergency state because i just
sprinted eight sets for 20 seconds on
and 10 seconds off
why is my brain telling me get as much
volume but we know that if you do close
your mouth it's difficult because your
your heart rate is up why is breathing
through your
nose not a signal that your brain's
telling you it's telling you the
opposite
so there's two different things going on
here i'm talking about chronic breathing
habitual breathing the way that we're
breathing 95 percent of the time that
should be in and out through the nose
period now when you're at rest when
you're walking doing zone 1 zone 2
exercise should be breathing through the
nose there are times when you can
breathe through the mouth and it's just
fine some yoga techniques have you
breathing through the mouth that's cool
because you're just doing that a few
times at stages in stages four and five
you can use mouth breathing as a tool a
very temporary tool to reset your
respiration get a little more air during
those times if you look at basketball
players who know what they're doing a
lot of them right before they dunk there
they take this huge breath totally fine
so there's uh it it's not absolute on
both of these ends yeah we have a mouth
we can breathe through it i just
breathed a breath through my mouth uh
when you laugh when you sigh you're
breathing through your mouth who cares
talk about chronic breathing now let's
talk about the breathing that you need
when you're really exerting yourself so
the body has a much higher demand for
oxygen in these states
a lot of people can adapt to just
breathe through their noses at these
higher states and use more oxygen so
one thing that you can do is put on a
pulse oximeter while you're working out
and there's a good chance
that your oxygen levels are not going
down when you're breathing through your
your uh nose at these very high states
of stress
what's happening is your co2 levels are
going up that response to breathe is
caused by co2 it is not caused by oxygen
so once you understand that and you can
lift your threshold for co2 you can go
further while breathing through your
nose i want to be very clear everyone's
different and so different people have
maybe structural issues with their noses
different tolerances of co2 so you have
to play around with this yourself but i
would suggest getting a pulse ox and
looking at your oxygen levels and you'll
be pretty amazed they they tend not to
go down
too too far when we're breathing slowly
and we feel like we're struggling for
oxygen we really aren't guys so that
would be like the optimal you have to
adapt but the optimal way of like sports
performance is still nasal breathing the
vast majority of time there are some
times when a soccer player is about
ready to kick in a goal you can default
to to mouth breathing who cares this is
a competition it's for a short amount of
time but for most of the exercise that
we're doing for especially zone three
zone two zone one you should be
breathing through your nose in and out
of your nose look at a cheetah running
at
70 miles per hour right look at a horse
running in a race are they ever
no they're not and so use nature as your
guide
absolutely
yeah so what would you say to people
that have like myself deviated septums
where it is quite difficult to breathe
out of their nose and my dad had the
surgery he said it really didn't even
help him but i've heard some people it
did help so what's your take on deviated
septums and people that really have to
like push hard to breathe through their
nose consciously
70
of the modern population has a septum
that is clearly deviated to the human
eye so you don't even need to put it
into some graph so a lot of times what
people are told is that oh my god you
have a deviated septum you have to get
this fixed immediately well the vast
majority of us are dealing with this
problem
i am not a surgeon so i can't advise a
blanket prescription for everybody
everybody is different
some people can benefit from surgery
i've heard from a lot of people that the
surgery has done nothing and in some
rare cases it's made things a lot worse
i would suggest and a responsible ent
and rhinologist would also suggest
start by trying to
make yourself a nasal breather start by
seeing what your natural body can do
give it a few months if you're still not
getting any progress there then yeah go
look at some other deeper interventions
for this i would start by
becoming a habitual nasal breather
easier said than done especially at
night breathe through your nose in and
out of your nose at night about 60 of
the population does not do this and it's
contributing to a lot of problems
can you actually shift without surgery
could you actually shift yourself from a
deviated septum by doing nasal breathing
for months maybe possibly years you
won't change the structure of your nose
but you will change those different
erectile tissues those different tissues
that line your nose
the nose is a use it or lose it organ so
the less you are using it the more
closed off it's going to become so
chronic obstruction leads to more
chronic obstruction i learned about this
at stanford from a breathing researcher
down there who was slated for surgery
and she thought something was a little
off with this and she opened up her nose
entirely has zero problems now by just
learning how to breathe better
so the one thing i'm i'm gonna be clear
again i'm not saying this is gonna fix
everything for everyone but you will
only get a net gain you will only get a
net benefit from doing this free thing
called
improving your breathing
so i heard
you you've talked on other interviews
and doing the research for this episode
that
you know as you're developing as a child
in the adolescent years you're the shape
of your jaw obviously all the model jaw
that everybody wants now they're getting
implants to have that square superman
batman jawline
as you're growing up if you're a mouth
breather you tend to have more narrow
face a long face
nasal breathers are like the ideal model
perfect square face now
for kids growing up that are listening
to this because we have some teenagers
we have a group of teenagers that listen
to
this would you
would you say it's too late to change
and then also can you change in your 20s
30s and 40s the actual bone structure of
your face by just shifting your
breathing
it's never too late to change and if
anyone tells you otherwise they're wrong
it's like saying you oh it's too late i
can't exercise now i can't get more
healthy i can't change my diet that a
lot of people use that excuse i don't
think it's a very good one so especially
when you're still developing it's much
easier to build a better foundation
right it's harder as you get older when
things get more set but if you're a kid
and you're a mouth breather a lot of
kids don't care about their health
they're like i don't care about my
health i'm young i'm fine
but i've spoken at many schools the one
thing that scares them silly is when you
say this is how your face is going to
develop if you continue breathing
through your mouth and then you just
watch the whole crowd just shut their
mouth so whatever it takes to get people
to do this this is a huge problem it's
so common it's called adenoid face this
is what researchers call it and they use
it to describe the facial shape quite
similar to mine uh that is very long you
know don't have the superman jaw don't
have that pro those pronatic features
and this is how the majority of us
have developed and what's fascinating is
that superman jaw
our ancestors all had it okay they all
had these pronatic faces
got it okay yeah because i have a
brother that's 16 and i told him because
he's a mouth breather i told him listen
you got to get this in check i uh i
bought him your book and i and then he's
reading it now he's 16. he's in high
school
so i definitely want him to get on it um
but can
just ask the question in a different way
i know you can change your habits
obviously but can you actually change
your bone structure as an adult by
breathing for years or no
so bone structures a little tricky i i
will mention that you can change
your the tone of your airway you can
change how those tissues adhere to your
airway you can influence the musculature
of your face and all of these things
will improve your breathing you can
influence how the tissues react in your
noses those those uh
erectile tissues that can dilate or
become engorged so you can affect all of
these different things
bone structure we're told that when you
get to be older like me
after 30 you just lose bone and and
women lose a ton of bone after
menopause which is why osteoporosis is a
worldwide problem but there's one bone
in the face that you can actually
increase bone density you can grow more
bone and it is your face
and so by chewing and by doing these
things we no longer do in modern society
you can send signals to your body to
build more bone in your face and this
sounds crazy but all you have to do is
look at the research i i did a study
over the course of the year to see if i
could grow more bone in my face supposed
to be impossible
and i grew about four pennies worth of
bone in my face which is a ton and other
people have grown a lot more
so it's impossible until you look at the
data you know so if you want a superman
jawline and you have a narrow joker face
you possibly can get close
no i would not say that i would not okay
i'm gonna backtrack you will be
adding on to what you already have the
foundation of what you already have the
good news is is that nature builds in
symmetry most of us have a face that is
slightly off-center now one eye is a
little higher than the other one ear is
a little higher we're a little
off-center and when you look at someone
else you identify beauty with symmetry
we've known this since the greeks had
this figured out right
so
what this allows you to do when you
start doing things humans are naturally
evolved to do like chew and building
this bone it's not like you're going to
build a bunch of bone on on one side of
the face
nature will build it so you become more
symmetrical so i'm not going to say a
joker is going to become a superman or
anything like that but it will only
improve what you have it won't make
things worse
you said chewing specifically i just
want to touch on that what do you
actually mean by chewing
i mean masqueradory stress i mean the
thing that our ancestors used to do for
two to three hours a day is they used to
chew hard raw
food
how often do we chew nowadays if you
think about the typical american diet
even stuff that's considered healthy
avocados
you know oatmeal smoothies there's no
chewing involved and you need if you're
going to build the muscles in your face
if you're going to help contribute to
that new bone growth you have to chew
and you have to chew a lot because
that's what we're designed to do this is
especially important for kids when
you're developing which is why kids who
have been breastfed who who ate real
food have that superman jaw right they
have this very wide face look at the
hunter gatherer cultures that are still
around they all have these same amazing
features and we did once too but we
don't chew anymore
so would you recommend obviously it's
hard i mean i guess you could eat harder
food or chew on a piece of bubble gum
that's rock hard for six hours and then
now they have that jawser size but
would you just recommend that someone
just chews longer even if their brain is
telling them to swallow
yeah no no bubble gum for six hours
everybody uh bad bad idea so the easiest
thing to do is to do what we have been
designed to do
is to eat real food okay not only are
you gonna get better nutrition that way
but it's gonna cause you to chew a lot
to eat a huge salad you're gonna be
chewing that for about 30 minutes right
30 45 minutes to get through a huge bowl
of salad i know a lot of teenagers are
like good luck there's no way i'm gonna
eat a bowl of salad so luckily there are
different things you can do you can get
some kinds of gum don't get gum with
sugar or saccharin or any of that crap
in it there are some types of gum that
are very hard that you can chew that
have been shown to to really have a
benefit not as much as food but and
there are some devices you can also get
that go in the mouth that stimulate that
chewing stress but the best thing is to
eat the way humans were designed to eat
gotcha do you have any brands for gum
that you use or you recommend for people
that want to jump on amazon right now
yeah there's this brand of gum called
felim or philim i think is how it's
pronounced in turkey it's this crazy
turkish gum sugar-free it comes in
weirdo flavors like carbonate and mint i
like the sugar-free mint type of this
gum they are not paying me to say any of
this so just a heads up you can buy it
on amazon i've been buying it for years
it's rock hard it does not taste very
good but man doesn't give a workout to
your jaws like half an hour 40 minutes
of that you really feel it and
i've heard this from so many people and
and i believe there's a study booming up
very soon with a similar type of gum to
show how it will influence facial
structure and and most importantly in my
opinion influence the quality of your
breathing and help tone those airways
got it okay so so chew
that specific type of gum chew longer
more natural food don't be a mouth
breather got it that's the checklist my
listeners are very like what do i do
cool story like how do i implement it
and become bradley cooper and limitless
i am i am uh i'm old so it takes me a
while to get the point i will add a
couple things to what you said well it's
good to explain stuff too and tell
people the origin okay
um you can cut me off no no problem but
i i will
so
how you hold your mouth is called oral
posture
not only is mouth breathing bad because
all the things you're just taking in
this raw unfiltered air but holding your
mouth this way that's what influences
how your face is going to grow even when
you're older you can in have a negative
influence on how your face is going to
grow so for so many reasons
you have to shut your mouth you have to
become a nasal breather if you don't do
that i'm convinced you will never ever
really be healthy so start with that
got it okay do you what if somebody
favors one side would you recommend
you know switching back and forth you do
10 minutes on your right side and then
10 minutes on your left side
so just think about great question think
about you're you're chewing a carrot uh
if you're vegan and if you're a
carnivore you're chewing a big piece of
meat right how do you chew that meat
just just imagine chewing that you are
never chewing on both sides
simultaneously
that's so awkward you are always chewing
on one side and then you shift it to the
other side and you're chewing on that
side
so when we are clenching our jaws if
anyone's sitting in class right now and
clenching your jaw trying to get chewing
stress that's the wrong stress because
that's associated with you're about to
fight you're stressed out and that sends
your body different signals in order to
build bone and have all these benefits i
was talking about you need to be in this
parasympathetic state and that
parasympathetic state happens when
you're chewing on one side or the other
so yeah you can do if you want to do
interval training with your mouth that's
cool but naturally if you're chewing gum
this side will get a little tired you're
going to shift it over here i would
shoot for about a half an hour a day
with hard gum mastic gum which is this
comes from the sap
from these trees and grease is also
great it tastes terrible but uh it is
it's rock hard and it gives you a good
workout
excellent what was the name of that gum
again it's called mastic gum
okay and you can there's various brands
of that i don't care what brand you get
of any of this stuff i'm just giving you
the principles and then you can run with
that for sure so i use i i knew i was a
mouth breather and identified oh wow
this is bad especially
going through your work and watching you
know your podcast that you've done and
i was like okay well when i'm
unconscious how can i train myself to
close my mouth i'm sleeping so i just
bought a bunch of mouth tape and
i've been using malte for about eight
months
and sometimes if i forget or i fall
asleep because i'm watching something
then i'll pass out i notice when i wake
up my mouth is closed
and i don't know if i really just kind
of train my brain to breathe through the
nose possibly or subconsciously but for
someone that is
oh first what's your take on mouth tape
in general and is there any other ways
to train yourself to subconsciously
breathe through your nose besides just
like brute force
so breathing through your nose during
the daytime is easier right you're awake
you're conscious you can make yourself
do it but what do you do when you go to
sleep your muscles relax more than 60
percent of us breathe through our mouths
when we're sleeping so it's the majority
of the population
and it's hard a hundred years ago 120
years ago they had chin straps and these
are these big advertisements for chin
straps because they said mouth breathing
makes you look bad it makes you
unhealthy and we knew about it then and
it seems like a lot of that
acid
gene has been lost in the last few
decades but to answer your question yes
i use mouth tape this sounds insane but
i've talked to so many people so many
researchers who swear by it at leading
institutions when i'm talking about
taping your mouth i'm not talking about
a fat strip of duct tape i'm talking
about using a very small piece of
surgical tape called micropore tape it
looks just like this i so happen to have
my mouth tape right here and
it just goes on this is how i do it
other people do a different way that's
fine
goes like this
that's the technology when you take it
off do not rip it off
use your tongue
look it comes right off if at night
you're stressed out or something happens
it should be able to come right off this
is just a reminder to keep your mouth
shut a lot of people can use this
for a couple of weeks for a couple of
months and then they are no longer mouth
breathing at night you're probably one
of them i am not one of them i have to
use this stuff
every single night uh to keep my mouth
shut and i've been using it for years
but i track my sleep and there is a
pronounced difference
between mouth breathing and nasal
breathing with sleep quality snoring and
even some people with sleep apnea have
reported a decrease or completely
reversal of their sleep apnea
yeah the mouth tape that i have it's
it's
in the other room it's it's like a it's
like a smile shape and you put it on
yeah it works pretty good
whatever works for you that's the thing
if that works for you that's that's cool
keep using it what's your take on nasal
strips
that expand do you think they're good
i've tried them
i have mixed feelings about them but
what's your take on them
i think anything that you can use to
help make that transition to nasal
breathing easier is a good idea so there
are breathe right strips you see a lot
of football players wearing these things
they just go over the bridge of your
nose guess what they do
they lift up your nostrils to make it
easier to breathe out of your nose and
you have to think about how odd this is
that humans are now developing these
things to mimic the way we were before
we screwed ourselves up but that's the
reality our nostrils many people have
nostrils that are too small or that
collapse inwards so those are great
there's also these inserts called mute
inserts that they go inside of your nose
and they increase airflow about 30
percent
i've heard in my
is those are cool for for a couple of
weeks especially at night they can
really help
but after that once you're acclimated
just like with sports conditioning
you tend not to need them because you
know how to breathe and your your nose
is opened up by them but everyone's
different some people may need them for
a few months some people may need them
forever some people may need them for a
couple of weeks it just depends on you
gotcha okay
what
what diseases have
you seen it could be heart disease
cancer
that
obviously there's no absolutes but the
data indicates that by mouth mouth
breathing is causing these specific
types of diseases like what's the most
pronounced disease that people are
getting from mouth breathing and then
when they switched over and did pure
nasal studies was there any increase of
reducing those
yeah so there are zero studies looking
at cancer and cardiovascular disease and
mouth breathing that you can associate
certain things with that but but know
science where the science exists is with
chronic respiratory disorders and with
anxiety and panic so with asthma
asthmatics tend to breathe through their
mouth they tend to breathe way more than
they need to their carbon dioxide levels
tend to be much lower than where they
should be and so by training an
asthmatic to breathe normally through
the nose in this slow pace has been
shown to be incredibly effective in
reducing the symptoms of asthma and in
some miraculous cases reversing it
completely these people no longer have
symptoms of asthma we've been told that
asthma is an incurable condition
i have seen some some proof that
suggests otherwise the same thing with
panic panic sufferers people with
anxiety tend to breathe in the same way
as asthmatics
so slow breathing careful breathing
becoming aware of your breath can has
been shown to have many benefits to that
if you look at periodontal disease if
you look at sleep disorder breathing now
we can get into increased risk of heart
disease we can get into increased risk
of stroke periodontal disease increased
risk of diabetes who knew that how you
breathed at night could determine
whether or not you get diabetes later on
in life
but it's all there and this is not my
research right you can look up right now
and look at sleep disorder breathing
sleep apnea diabetes heart disease
cancer and more and you see it's there
wow that's interesting
have you seen any where people
implemented those breathings and it
reversed that do you know the specific
time period on when people should see
some type of result
i've seen this hundreds and hundreds and
hundreds of times and
the data bears this out
in all of these studies i mentioned and
i have 400 450 studies available on my
website for free for for anyone who
wants to to look this up themselves so
asthma is is
uh usually asthmatics once they're
taught how to breathe
different again so i can't offer say
that this works in the same way for
everybody but it's pretty instantaneous
the improvement panic the same way for
periodontal disease that takes a lot
longer for the body to restore itself
and if you're looking at sleep disorder
breathing and sleep apnea they know once
sleep apnea is stopped if sleep apnea is
the root cause to these problems those
problems tend to go away pretty quickly
because that's what's causing them and
it's so sad to see that 80 of people
with moderate to severe sleep apnea are
undiagnosed they don't know why they
have all these problems why they're
getting sicker and sicker it's because
they're choking on themselves every
single night
um
people that are using cpap machines if
they converted to nasal breathing do you
think that the cpap machine industry
would just go out of business over time
it depends
what is causing their sleep apnea okay
if if someone is 600 pounds then i don't
think any amount of healthy breathing is
going to help that person
improve their sleep apnea at all so it
really depends on what is the core issue
with sleep apnea is tricky because it
can be structural it can be mental there
are different forms of sleep apnea it
can occur in different parts of the
airway so again you have to identify
where is the root problem to be clear
cpaps work wonders they've saved
innumerable lives
are they helping to cure sleep apnea
no
what they're doing is their band-aid a
really effective band-aid for a
situation but when you stop using your
cpap
your apnea comes back so i'm more
interested or i have been is talking to
the scientists who are trying to
understand the core problem of sleep
apnea and a permanent and durable fix to
get these people to breathe normally
without wearing a terrestrial scuba mask
every night
absolutely
i've heard on some of your other
previous podcasts and episodes that you
talked about epo and how you can
actually increase your natural epo
versus someone like you know everyone
knows famously or infamously uh lance
armstrong for taking epo and then
getting taken out of the record books
for increasing endurance and all these
things injecting epo which increases
your red blood cells and all this stuff
right
what is the correlation with nasal
breathing and increase
of epo and is there specific like
i guess exercises that someone can do if
they want to increase their natural epo
and have a better endurance whether
they're an athlete or or whatever
so a lot of athletes go to
altitude to build blood right that's a
pretty standard thing you go to six
thousand seven thousand eight thousand
feet you work out for weeks or months to
build more blood so then when you come
back down to sea level you have more
capacity to carry more oxygen more
oxygen is more energy so lance armstrong
was doing this he was he was cheating he
was just injecting at epo to build more
blood but there have been studies and
this is fascinating that you can mimic
the effects of altitude training by
controlling your breath this takes some
doing you really need a coach to do this
so hype
hypoventilation training which is under
breathing training
breath holds are very good for this and
this is when you force yourself to
breathe just below your metabolic needs
and you train this way
and i've done it it sucks it's really
difficult because your survival instinct
keeps saying whoa do it you need to
breathe now you need to breathe a lot
and you're trying to turn that off
but
the effects and the improvement that
athletes get from this is is really
pronounced and this is becoming a really
big field of research for cardiovascular
disease for weight loss you will lose
more weight
through this hypoventilation training
than you will
otherwise and it's interesting to use
these different hacks and breathing mess
with your metabolic needs and and to
trigger these different effects so
that's what that is and that's why it's
related to epo and building blood
if somebody wanted to
learn more about that or actually do it
but they don't have a coach would you
just recommend go on youtube is there
any specific people that have a channel
that they're experts
yeah anders olsen uh is a real expert in
this world uh patrick mcewen at oxygen
advantage if anyone's a real go-getter
high-performance person that wants to
jump up that next rung of potential
he's i've talked to some of the
people that he has trained olympians
special forces
across the board and it can have a huge
difference to performance and recovery
and a lot of what he does is breath
control on that under breathing so those
are two really good sources uh xavier
warren's at paris 13
university has done this work for the
past 20 years and he's a good person to
look up as well
gotcha okay so go to those different
channels if you don't have a coach or
you can't pay a coach you can go to them
specifically um
awesome man um
what is your take on wim hof breathing
in his whole thing are you a fan of it
or it's okay to you or what's your take
on his specific type of breathing and do
you think it
every athlete
or you think most athletes should be
implementing that
to get stronger or faster or whatnot
i think wim has done more to bring
breathing awareness and the potential of
breathing to the mass public than anyone
else in the past 50 60 years i really do
i think he's such an inspiring character
he's the first person to acknowledge
i've talked with him several times he's
like this is not new stuff they call it
the wim hof method but it's been around
for talk to a tumor monk
about the wim hof method he's like yeah
it's called tumo we've been doing this
for thousands of years that's not to
belittle what he's doing he's getting
the word out to people who wouldn't know
about it otherwise
it's extremely effective the science
shows that
i'm a big fan of these forced
hyperventilation
training methods what they do is they
purposely stress your body out for a
very short amount of time so that you
don't carry that stress throughout the
day which is what most of us do right
it's like working out it's you you're
focusing that amount you're building
those those
muscles of breathing and conditioning
yourself
so that the rest of the time you can
breathe normally so you can call it wim
hof method you could call it sudarshan
kriya kundalini pranayama they're all
doing the same thing
with the wim hof method and also with
the you know increase
epo naturally method uh do what's the
results uh in the tests that have came
back on brain performance because a lot
of people think about physical
performance being faster be more
athletic but what about being smarter
and increasing your you know oxygen to
the brain
has that been as drastic as physical
performance
so anyone who thinks they're getting
more oxygen to the brain by over
breathing is wrong
what is happening is you are having the
exact opposite effect right now
you take about 20 30 big breaths you're
gonna feel light-headed why do you feel
light-headed because you are getting uh
the circulation is
is slowing down to the brain which is
also why your hands and feet may go numb
or feel cold so when you over breathe
you inhibit circulation when you breathe
in line with your metabolic needs that
circulation increases which is why
slowing slow breathing helps to heat the
body up and deliver more blood to the
brain we also know there was a study
done at northwestern
about three or four years ago that
showed that breathing through the nose
in a rhythmic pattern helps align
different sections of the brain to allow
you to think more clearly the different
brain waves come into coherence so this
is so effective for focused
tasks is to have your breath slow and
rhythmic and we can see this with eeg
studies and and other studies that are
all available on the site so you'd
recommend anyone that's doing some form
of deep work shout out to cal newport
any type of deep work that slow
breathing and maybe that's why
meditation is so effective because
day one of meditation class they talk
about what breathing
meditation is breathing the benefits you
get from meditation for the first six
months to a year
i would argue
are from breathing i don't know any
meditation that you can sit their mouth
breathing
the first thing you do is
slow everything down how do you slow
everything down you slow it by breathing
more slowly so breathing is this thing
that you can you can slow it down to
elicit different reactions in your body
you can speed it up to elicit different
reactions you can breathe less you can
breathe more so all of these different
things you can use depending on what you
need your breath to do for you at that
moment
gotcha okay so if you want to be super
genius highest level intellect slow
breathing and maybe implement some
meditation
slow rhythmic breathing is going to be
the most efficient way to provide fuel
for your brain to do what it needs to do
when you say rhythmic breathing do you
mean like box breathing or what is that
specifically you can do you can do box
breathing if you want it needs to be in
a rhythm when you're breathing this most
people when they sit down at their
computer answer their email guess what
they do they hold their breath and then
they go
there's no pattern to it right you're
stopping you're starting you're
breathing in longer than you're
breathing out and then you flip that
so by allowing yourself to come into a
natural rhythm whether that's an inhale
to three or four or you can do it longer
to five or six and then exhale for that
same amount but that natural rhythm puts
your body at ease and allows it to
better do what it's designed to do
i use there's various apps that do this
that has a little sound that goes blue
[Music]
so you don't have to look at your phone
and when i get stressed out i put my
phone on my desk and i breathe along
with that as i answer
400 extremely boring and irritating
emails and it really helps you get
through these tasks
what's the name of the app that you that
you use the i'm on android the one i
used is called paste breathing it's got
the worst ux you've ever seen but i'm
not looking at for for good design
i'm looking for something that is very
simple
and that works and i you know what since
since i have you here here it is it's
got ux from uh you know 1997.
that's the sound it makes
you don't need a bunch of bells and
whistles i'm putting this thing
on my desk to just breathe along with it
so yeah this looks like you know web 1.0
uh dos situation but uh it it works
great for me there are dozens of other
breathing apps that do the similar thing
i would suggest getting an app where you
can program your own time into it and i
like six seconds in six seconds out
well breathing is human 1.0 so i guess
everything comes full circle right there
there you go maybe maybe the lo-fi
version is is better for us
possibly well james i appreciate your
time uh coming on the show i think a lot
of people are going to extract a lot of
knowledge and information of what you've
researched and what you said and
implemented into their life and i think
you're going to help a lot of people
you're going to help the old generation
the mid-range generation and i really
think you're going to impact the younger
generation um you know reversing mouth
breathing into nasal breathing what's on
the horizon for you now and how do
people reach out to you they want to
learn more from you
i am
at
mrjamesnester.com that's mr
jamesnester.com there are breathing
exercises it's all free there's no pay
ball or anything like that free
interviews all the scientific references
i'm also trying to get better at this
thing called instagram which is for an
older person is so frustrating at mr
james nestor.com or just mr james nestor
i'm working on a few different projects
right now fun stuff uh i'm excited to go
back into my mo hole in the backyard for
the next couple of years and and just
slave away on some more research
got you
not related to breathing something
completely different
you know i think if i was a smart
business person i'd come out with
breathe deeper or breath too but i'm not
uh no this is my book on breathing i put
everything i had into this thing if
that's just you know that yeah it is
what it is and i'm moving on to
something else i understand all right
well i appreciate you on the show and uh
that's it guys so again in the show
description below you'll see all of
james's links if you want to reach out
to him if you want to contact him if you
want to buy his book all the links will
be down there uh james i appreciate you
and this is the justin caviar show we're
out
bye bye y'all
